chore: AGENTS.md file COR-1031 (#2148)
zcash/librustzcash: AGENTS.md

- Define capability traits in terms of domain types, not implementation details.

## Architecture Patterns

- **Authorization typestate**: Bundles are parameterized by `Authorization` associated
  types to enforce compile-time correctness of transaction construction stages.
- **`no_std` by default**: Most crates use `#![no_std]` with `extern crate alloc`.
  The `std` feature is optional.
- **`MapAuth` trait**: Transforms authorization types during transaction construction.
- **`from_parts` constructors**: Preferred over public struct fields.
- **`testing` submodules**: Exposed via `test-dependencies` feature for cross-crate
  test utilities (proptest strategies, mock implementations).

## Changelog & Commit Discipline

- Update the crate's `CHANGELOG.md` for any public API change, bug fix, or semantic change.
- Commits must be discrete semantic changes — no WIP commits in final PR history.
- Each commit that alters public API must also update docs and changelog in the same commit.
- Use `git revise` to maintain clean history within a PR.
- Commit messages: short title (<120 chars), body with motivation for the change.

> 

Author: I'll add this, but it may be out of scope for an agent. Unless you want your agent branching and committing for you. I don't, and I don't want to _imply_ that an agent should take these steps on my behalf, but the proof is in the pudding.

### Serialization

- All serialized data MUST be versioned at the top level.
- Do NOT use derived `serde` serialization except in explicitly marked cases (e.g. `pczt`).
- Serialization-critical types must not be modified after public release.

### Side Effects & Capability-Oriented Programming

- Write referentially transparent functions where possible.
- Use `for` loops (not `map`/iterator chains) when the body produces side effects.
- Provide side-effect capabilities as explicit trait arguments (e.g., `clock: impl Clock`).
- Define capability traits in terms of domain types, not implementation details.

## Architecture Patterns

- **Authorization typestate**: Bundles are parameterized by `Authorization` associated
  types to enforce compile-time correctness of transaction construction stages.
- **`no_std` by default**: Most crates use `#![no_std]` with `extern crate alloc`.
  The `std` feature is optional.
- **`MapAuth` trait**: Transforms authorization types during transaction construction.
- **`from_parts` constructors**: Preferred over public struct fields.
- **`testing` submodules**: Exposed via `test-dependencies` feature for cross-crate

>   test utilities (proptest strategies, mock implementations).

Reviewer: This contains a bit that's somewhat over-specialized.

since LLMs cannot render diagrams.

### Zcash Protocol

| Crate | Role |
| --- | --- |
| `zcash_protocol` | Constants, consensus parameters, bounded value types (`Zatoshis`, `ZatBalance`), memo types |
| `zcash_transparent` | Bitcoin-derived transparent addresses, inputs, outputs, bundles; transparent PCZT support |
| `zcash_primitives` | Primary transaction data type, transaction builder(s), proving/signing/serialization, low-level fee types |
| `zcash_proofs` | Sprout circuit and Sapling proving system |

### Keys, Addresses & Wallet Support

| Crate | Role |
| --- | --- |
| `zcash_address` | Parsing & serialization of Zcash addresses (unified address/fvk/ivk containers); no protocol-specific deps |
| `zip321` | Parsing & serialization for ZIP 321 payment requests |
| `eip681` | Parsing & serialization for EIP 681 payment requests |
| `zcash_keys` | Spending keys, viewing keys, addresses; ZIP 32 key derivation; Unified spending/viewing keys |
| `pczt` | Partially Constructed Zcash Transaction types and role interfaces |
| `zcash_client_backend` | Wallet framework: storage APIs, chain scanning, light client protocol, fee calculation, transaction proposals |

> | `zcash_client_sqlite` | SQLite-based implementation of `zcash_client_backend` storage APIs |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `zcash_client_sqlite` | SQLite-based implementation of `zcash_client_backend` storage APIs |
| `zcash_client_memory` | In-memory implementation of `zcash_client_backend` storage APIs |
```

| `f4jumble` | Encoding for Unified addresses |
| `zcash_encoding` | Bitcoin-derived transaction encoding utilities |
| `equihash` | Proof-of-work protocol implementation |

### External Protocol Crates (separate repos, depended upon here)

| Crate | Role |
| --- | --- |
| `sapling-crypto` | Sapling shielded protocol |
| `orchard` | Orchard shielded protocol |
| `zcash_note_encryption` | Note encryption shared across shielded protocols |
| `zip32` | HD key derivation (ZIP 32) |
| `zcash_spec` | Zcash specification utilities |

### Dependency Rules

- Dependencies flow **downward**: higher-level crates depend on lower-level ones, never
  the reverse.
- `zcash_protocol` is the lowest layer in this repo — most crates depend on it.
- `zcash_client_sqlite` sits at the top, depending on `zcash_client_backend`.

## Build & Test Commands

For the most part we follow standard Rust `cargo` practices.

**Important:** This workspace requires `--all-features` for builds and tests to match CI.

```sh
# Check without codegen (fastest iteration)
cargo check --workspace --all-features

# Build entire workspace
cargo build --workspace --all-features

# Test entire workspace (matches CI)

> cargo test --workspace --all-features

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
cargo test --workspace --all-features

# Test with feature combinations relevant to the changed code, e.g.
cargo test --workspace --features orchard
cargo test --workspace --features transparent-inputs
```

```

### Test Performance

Tests are computationally expensive (cryptographic proofs). The `[profile.test]` uses
`opt-level = 3` by default. This means compilation is slow but test execution is fast.

Using `--profile=dev` trades this: compilation is fast but tests run ~10x slower because
cryptographic operations are unoptimized. Only use it when iterating on compilation errors,
not when you need to actually run tests to completion.

```sh
# Fast compile, slow run — only for checking compilation
cargo test --profile=dev -p <crate_name> <test_name>

# Expensive/slow tests (CI runs these separately)
cargo test --workspace --all-features --features expensive-tests

# NU7 unstable network upgrade tests
RUSTFLAGS='--cfg zcash_unstable="nu7"' cargo test --workspace --all-features
```

## Lint & Format

```sh
# Format (CI runs this with --check)
cargo fmt --all
cargo fmt --all -- --check

# Clippy — must pass with zero warnings (CI uses -D warnings)
cargo clippy --all-features --all-targets -- -D warnings

# Doc link validation (CI uses nightly)
cargo doc --no-deps --workspace --all-features --document-private-items
```

## Feature Flags

### Common Workspace Feature Flags

> These feature flags are used consistently across crates in the repository:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
These feature flags have a consistent meaning across all crates in the repository:
```
